[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to Beyond Belief.
I'm George Noory.
You know, it's hard to
believe that we are now
at the 70th anniversary
of the crash of Roswell,
New Mexico, an
amazing story where
researchers like Don Schmidt
have been investigating
for years now.
Don wrote the book, "UFO
Crash at Roswell," which
was turned into the movie
"Roswell," nominated
for a Golden Globe,
is with us to talk
about the 70th anniversary.
70 years, Don.
>>DON SCHMIDT: 70
years, George, yes.
>>NOORY: Where does time go?
>>SCHMIDT: Well, at least
we weren't around back then.
>>NOORY: You know
what, I would have
liked to have been around back
then just to have witnessed
all these things.
>>SCHMIDT: Yes, I thought
of that myself at times.
But then to witness
as a child what
so many of those
young people did
at that time, the
oppression, the intimidation
that they witnessed
their fathers,
their families live
through, over something
that it was originally
explained away
as just the off-the-shelf
mundane weather balloon.
And yet, they
couldn't get through.
As one of the officers'
sons said to us,
it was like living with
a father in a bubble
that you couldn't break through.
It was always, don't
ask me about that,
I can't talk about
that, right up
to the time they
finally passed away.
>>NOORY: Don, give
us a quick overview
of what you think may have
happened back in July of 1947.
>>SCHMIDT: Of course.
And I always qualify my words,
my position, with the fact
that I was a skeptic.
I thought we would make a
single weekend jaunt down
to New Mexico.
And at that time, it was
the beginning of 1989.
And we thought we'd come away
with a balloon explanation
or something just as
conventional, just as prosaic.
And then we started to
speak to the people who
actually handled the material,
the wreckage, firsthand.
And we realized, my god, what
if they're telling us the truth.
And when I talk
about wreckage, we're
talking about the
summer of 1947.
And any of your
viewers could go back
and check all the newspaper
accounts of that summer
wave of flying disk activity.
It was as though the
country was being invaded.
Banner headline after headline,
one day after another,
of even attempted
aircraft scrambles
trying to bring one down,
trying to get something
on camera, anything to explain
what was invading our air
space at that time.
And New Mexico, which was the
heart of all military activity
at that time--
>>NOORY: And the country
was paranoid anyway.
So it was after the war.
>>SCHMIDT: It was just the
beginning of the Cold War.
It was just after World War II.
We had just detonated the first
atomic bomb in New Mexico.
And you had that very
squadron, the 509 Bomb Wing,
which had just dropped
the two bombs on Japan
two years before, they happened
to be stationed at Roswell.
Well, there was a
violent thunderstorm
in the central High Desert
portion of New Mexico.
>>NOORY: And they get them.
>>SCHMIDT: And they get them.
>>NOORY: And I
remember when I was
at one of the
anniversaries of Roswell,
they wanted to fly me from
the Albuquerque airport
on a little type of prop plane.
>>SCHMIDT: Mesa Airlines, right.
>>NOORY: And I said,
no way, we're driving.
>>SCHMIDT: Because you're
flying through the storm
in a small plane, as
opposed to over it.
And the ranchers
north of Roswell
described that between
the thunder claps
was a sound of
something different,
almost like an explosion.
Well, it was the next
morning that a ranch
foreman by the name of
W.W. Mac Brazel rode out
and he discovered it.
>>NOORY: The rancher.
>>SCHMIDT: A rancher.
And he discovers this
huge debris field
of this bizarre, this strange
material that he had never
seen before.
And he would report it
to the local sheriff
in Roswell, Sheriff George
Wilcox, who in turn contacted
the Roswell Army Air Field.
The head intelligence
officer, Major Jesse Marcel,
contacted their base commander,
Colonel William Blanchard.
And this material that
the rancher brought in so
impressed them, nobody
could identify it,
that he just didn't dispel--
>>NOORY: Did it have little,
funny hieroglyphs on it
and things?
>>SCHMIDT: It had
hieroglyphic-like symbology
that ran the struts, the
lengths of some of the material.
The material itself was
paper thin, practically
weightless, larger sheets of it.
But you couldn't dent it.
You couldn't bend it.
And the material that we still
refer to as our holy grail,
that it was the same
paper thin-like material.
But this you could crumble.
You could crease.
You could fold.
You could wad it up.
But you'd place it down and
it would flow like water.
>>NOORY: Amazing.
>>SCHMIDT: It would
just smooth right out.
>>NOORY: Well, you wrote the
book, "UFO Crash at Roswell"--
>>SCHMIDT: With Kevin
Randall, correct.
>>NOORY: Which was
a dramatic book.
Kevin's been on Coast to
Coast with me numerous times.
It was turned into a
movie called "Roswell."
>> For more than six
hours in July of 1947,
the town of Roswell was known
as the flying saucer capital
of the world.
Debris recovered from a
crash site in the desert
was originally identified by
Army intelligence officer Major
Jesse Marcel as being
from a flying saucer.
But the party didn't
last too long,
much to the embarrassment of
the Army and, in particular,
Major Marcel, shown
here holding what
turned out to be a
piece of aluminum foil
from a weather balloon.
>>NOORY: I remember that movie.
And it was so poignant
and so right on.
It tells your book--
>>SCHMIDT: And it
names the names.
>>NOORY: --in the
audio [INAUDIBLE]..
>>SCHMIDT: It recreates.
It dramatizes.
And we were technical
advisers on the set as well,
both the exteriors
in Bisbee, Arizona,
as well as everything we filmed
as far as in northern LA.
And what was wonderful
was also the response
from the cast and crew, that
they wanted to be part of this.
They were proud to be part
of essentially breaking
through this cloud of
mystery, presenting
what we at least knew based on
all the eyewitness testimony.
>>NOORY: The guy with the
glasses with the white hair,
who was he depicting?
>>SCHMIDT: He was depicting
an older Major Jesse Marcel.
>>NOORY: Ah ha.
>>SCHMIDT: Then
lieutenant colonel,
who he was dying of
emphysema at the time.
And he was the
original fall guy.
He was the one that
General Roger Ramey,
at the Fort Worth
press conference,
going up the chain of
command when they substituted
the weather balloon with the
radar reflector kite wreckage
for the original material, and
he was ordered to pose with it,
knowing full well
that it wasn't--
>>NOORY: I remember, he
was like stooped down.
I remember that picture.
>>SCHMIDT: --knowing
full well that it
wasn't what he retrieved,
what he handled,
what he saw, as far as
that massive debris field.
And then he was told, you know,
Jess, just be a good soldier.
Five years, 10 years, 15 years,
it's all going to come out.
Well it's 30 years
later, he's dying,
and he realizes it's
not going to come out.
>>NOORY: It's not
going to come out.
And you could see
the frustration right
in the movie on his face.
>>SCHMIDT: As we asked
him to actually portray
that level of frustration.
And he breaks his oath of
security and he comes out.
And he states, being
familiar with all materials
both foreign and domestic, this
was nothing made on this earth.
Well, how much
more profound do we
need to hear from somebody
regarding this incident?
>>NOORY: When Brazel
found the wreckage,
was it totally
obliterated debris?
Or was there structure?
Was there a craft
there that he saw?
That's what has always
confused me, Don.
>>SCHMIDT: There were
three different sites all
along the same trajectory line.
The debris field, as Brazel
would describe, and then
as Marcel then being ordered
to go out and investigate
this first-hand, there
was a secondary body site
atop a bluff about 2 and 1/2
miles from the debris field.
And then along that trajectory
line much closer to Roswell
was where the remains of
the craft and the crew.
>>NOORY: So what,
it broke apart,
and pieces would fall
as it moved along?
>>SCHMIDT: Correct.
Correct.
There seemed to be, whether
it was struck by lightning
or an internal malfunction
that caused it to explode,
raining debris.
And then a couple of
bodies were either ejected
or from the decompression.
We don't know.
And then the remains
of a capsule or a pod
continued onward for
another 25, 30 miles.
But the point is,
we have witnesses
to all of those locations.
>>NOORY: All those sites.
>>SCHMIDT: And the thing is
that what gave us away the fact
that something happened
much closer to Roswell
was that when you had the local
sheriff's department, as well
as the local fire department,
going north of town,
as well as the Roswell
Army Air Field,
this was in their jurisdiction,
whereas Lincoln County, where
the debris field was
located, would not have
been within their jurisdiction.
>>NOORY: Of all the years you've
been investigating this, Don,
what do you find to be, for
you, the most fascinating aspect
of this case?
>>SCHMIDT: Well,
first of all, the hunt
for the holy grail,
as we continue,
whether it's through
archaeological work.
We've had now five digs at
the debris field site as we--
>>NOORY: Are you
still finding things?
>>SCHMIDT: We are.
Our local geologist by
the name of Frank Kimbler,
who works in between
our projects,
has found a number of
remnants, metal-like material,
that when tested, when analyzed,
certain elements should not
be there.
There's a specific
hardening agent
that is used
specifically with steel.
And yet there it
is with aluminum.
And there is no such
registered, as far as alloy,
anywhere on Earth
that we're aware of.
So we need to have these
samples analyzed, and then
duplicated effort
in other labs, which
will be as far as exciting.
But sadly, but yet
also gratifying,
are more and more of the
deathbed testimonies,
admissible in a court
of law, the fact
that these people
are stating right
til their very last days that
this did happen, that this was
not a weather balloon, this
was nothing conventional
of any sort, that this was, as
that very first press release,
the recovery of a
crashed flying saucer.
>>NOORY: What about
the bodies that they
talked about and the mortician
who is no longer with us,
Glenn Dennis?
What was that?
>>SCHMIDT: The phone calls
that originated to the Ballard
Funeral Home, already suggesting
that something significant had
happened.
The base hospital,
in tracking down
some of the remaining doctors
and nurses, and the way
they were essentially
prevented from being
involved with this incident.
Other doctors came
in, other nurses
came in to the base hospital.
One of the nurses,
Rosemary McManus,
told us that clearly
something big had happened.
>>NOORY: And they ordered little
children-sized coffins, right?
>>SCHMIDT: And there
were phone calls
that came to the funeral home
requesting child-sized caskets.
And Glenn Dennis, obviously
the reaction, my god, you
had some type of incident
involving children.
Well, no, we just wanted to
have them on standby if that
should ever be the case.
Well, in the meantime,
you have witnesses
describing the little
people, the little men.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
What a story.
>>SCHMIDT: As I kind
of got Walter Haut, who
was Colonel Blanchard's
public information officer,
and I kind of tricked him.
>>NOORY: Now, he's the one
who changed the story, right?
>>SCHMIDT: Or he fleshed it out.
He finally revealed much
more of his involvement.
And one of the first ways
I kind of tricked Walter
into admitting much more is
I was sitting with Walter,
and we were just talking
as far as very socially
about other things.
And all at once I said,
Walter, how tall did Butch--
which is what he always called
Blanchard, Butch, the old man--
how tall did Butch tell
you the bodies were.
And Waller's arm
shot out like that.
>>NOORY: To show you a height.
>>SCHMIDT: About a height
just above his shoulder.
>>NOORY: Didn't
deny bodies, right?
>>SCHMIDT: Right.
But he looked at me
like, you got me.
>>NOORY: You tricked me.
And that's where it opened
up more and more to the point
that he provided
information that
became part of his
sealed statement
that he signed for
posthumous release.
And that way he could
feel that he still
kept his word to Blanchard.
He kept his word that
as long as he was alive,
he never talked about this.
>>NOORY: Well, you were
talking about the debris field.
Back to the movie "Roswell"
for a little clip.
>> Think it could be Russian?
>> I sure hope not.
>> Did you try a cutting torch?
>>NOORY: What was
that all about, Don?
It was as if they were talking
about a craft or something.
>>SCHMIDT: Well, I love that
scene because it gives a great
visual as far as where they're
trying to actually drill with
a hardened drill bit through--
>>NOORY: Into the structure?
>>SCHMIDT: Into a
piece of the wreckage.
And they can't even scratch it.
All at once the bit snaps.
It flies across the room.
>>NOORY: And they're
going, is it Russian?
Is it Russian?
>>SCHMIDT: And then they
remark, could it be?
And sure hope not, because
we're in trouble if it is.
And so it's very dramatic.
But it demonstrates
precisely what
the witnesses, whether
civilian or military,
have described to us after all
these years, that this material
was practically indestructible.
>>SCHMIDT: What made
them change the story?
Because the original
radio broadcast
was that they had captured
a downed flying saucer.
>>SCHMIDT: Well, they actually
put out a press release.
And what one has to keep in mind
is that when the rancher first
brought some of the samples
into town, which was Sunday,
July 6th, as the base commander
going up the chain of command,
and it goes all the
way to Washington.
And General Clements
McMullin at the Pentagon
calls up and says, I want some
of that material immediately
brought, flown out that evening.
>>NOORY: Instantly.
Now.
>>SCHMIDT: So by Sunday
evening, July 6th,
Washington already has some
of the samples in hand.
The press release doesn't
go out for another two days.
Tuesday, July 8th they announce
they captured a flying saucer,
but all with the intent of the
creation of this straw man.
They build it up, also
then with the plan
they're going to tear it down.
So within five hours, they
have the weather balloon press
conference with Major Marcel.
And it's all explained away.
It was just a misidentification.
Mind you, George, it
was the first time
in history, first and
only time in history
that a weather balloon
was misidentified
as a flying saucer.
>>NOORY: Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
Weren't they also concerned
about the Japanese launching
balloon bombs?
But, my god, that
was two years later.
>>SCHMIDT: It was
two years later.
And in fact, the suggestion
that these Fugo balloon
bombs, these Japanese
balloon bombs, one
would then have to believe
that they were orbiting
the planet for two
years before one
happened to come down
on that very ranch.
And this ranch was no
stranger to such recoveries.
They were constantly
retrieving balloons.
In fact, there were
typically tags specifically
instructing the finder where
to report this and rewards,
$5 to $10 for such devices.
There were no tags
within this debris.
There was nothing to
suggest this was--
>>NOORY: What is new today
in terms of information
that's being released, Freedom
of Information Act documents?
Anything out there?
>>SCHMIDT: One of
the things that--
and some of my colleagues, and
for all of their failed efforts
in finding documents,
I always point out
that one of the major obstacles
we had with the Nuremberg
trials regarding as far as all
the captured Nazis was there
was very little paper trail.
There was nothing that
they could put their finger
on as to, this is what you were
instructed to do at those--
>>NOORY: They burned documents
and burned them fast.
>>SCHMIDT: Right That's right.
And the same should be
expected with anything
still very top secret
within our own government,
that we should not expect there
to be a trail of documents
pointing into the direction
that we need to go
to find answers regarding this.
>>NOORY: So they got
to the documents?
They ripped them
up, didn't they?
>>SCHMIDT: Well, as the
General County of Office
determined for the late
congressman Steven Schiff
in 1997, that the documents had
supposedly all been destroyed.
But I don't believe that.
I disbelieve that they have
been also encryptically encoded
that we wouldn't recognize
them to see them,
and that wherever they
didn't need paper,
they didn't use paper.
It was all word of mouth.
It was dealing with the
military, with orders,
with instructions.
And they just went
through the motions.
They knew what to do.
>>NOORY: What was the
reaction at the time
worldwide to this story?
I mean, was there any
reaction from some
of the other countries, the
Soviet Union at the time?
>>SCHMIDT: Absolutely.
In fact, the late
president, Joseph Stalin,
according to Pravda, they
came out with a report in 1988
that Stalin, especially after
they were caught completely
flat-footed with the
first atomic bomb,
they had no idea that we were
even working on the technology.
And yet after Roswell, he
did not believe the balloon
explanation.
He felt it still--
>>NOORY: Who would?
>>SCHMIDT: Right.
Well, we do.
We did.
Because we accepted that.
>>NOORY: We fell for it.
>>SCHMIDT: We fell for it.
>>NOORY: We accepted
everything governments
said to us in that time.
>>SCHMIDT: And that's
the amazing thing,
that we accept what
the government tells us
about everything.
But we don't.
We know we don't.
We've grown to
become very cynical--
>>NOORY: Now we have.
>>SCHMIDT: --about most
things about the government,
except when it comes
to UFOs, except when
it comes to Roswell.
Well, we can't
have it both ways.
It's just like with
deathbed testimony.
We can't say that
deathbeds are admissible
and we accept them as factual
evidentiary information
about everything except Roswell.
We can't have it both ways.
It's either the same for all.
And that's another
major conviction
that I have regarding
this, that the witnesses,
down to their dying breaths,
are saying this did happen.
>>NOORY: Did anybody
report seeing the object
break up as it was coming down?
You know, we have
the Brazel testimony
and him bringing
in the artifacts.
>>SCHMIDT: Yes.
>>NOORY: But did anybody
see something happening?
>>SCHMIDT: There were a
number of reports of people,
whether it was people at
the base, or even nuns
as far as at St. Mary's
Hospital, and a number
of local civilians given it's
just before a 4th of July
weekend.
And it's a beautiful
summer evening.
The thunderstorms are coming in.
>>NOORY: You can
see it rolling in.
>>SCHMIDT: From the high
desert off the mountains.
And a number of
witnesses described
either an unknown object
heading in that direction
or a light arching
with a contrail arching
within that region at that time.
But nothing definitive,
nothing that anybody
ever saw the actual crash,
the actual, as far as event,
but certainly the aftermath.
>>NOORY: When that
day comes and I'm
on my deathbed and my
family is around me,
and if I had any trade
secrets of whatever I
may have done in my life,
that's the point where
you begin to tell everything.
You don't lie on your deathbed.
I've never known
anybody who would.
Are there recent
deathbed confessions
from people who have
been witnesses to Roswell
or are in the know that they,
on their deathbed, have said
something?
>>SCHMIDT: Just imagine
this scenario where
you are about to go under
the knife for a major heart
surgery, quadruple bypass, and
you're lying there on a gurney
and you're with your daughter.
And you wave her down, and
you realize that I may not
walk away from this.
>>NOORY: You may not
come out of this.
>>SCHMIDT: I might
not even wake up.
And I need to tell
you this, sweetheart.
I was there in '47.
You know I was
stationed at Roswell.
Well, I was part of
the recovery operation.
I was out at the crash site.
I saw the craft.
I saw the bodies.
They were not from here.
One of them was alive.
What would possess anyone
to doing such a thing?
And that's exactly what
Sergeant Homer Rowlett
did to his daughter.
>>NOORY: Wow.
When did that happen?
>>SCHMIDT: That happened just
a few years ago before he died.
So again, it's contemporary.
It isn't back then.
It isn't back in the '80s.
We're talking within
the last few years.
And both her and her
son are still alive.
And then she would
learn thereafter
that her brother heard
the exact same thing
before he went into the hospital
because he confided to him as
well.
And the account was exact.
>>NOORY: Why didn't that story
get widespread publicity?
>>SCHMIDT: No different
than why didn't
Jesse Marcel, Major Marcel's
story about I handled
pieces that were
not from this Earth
receive any publicity except
for the National Enquirer.
>>NOORY: Which nobody
believed at the time.
>>SCHMIDT: And then when
General Thomas DuBose, who
was General Ramey's chief
of staff at Fort Worth, he's
in two of the photographs of
the substituted weather balloon.
And when he signed
an affidavit, which
stated, we substituted
the weather
balloon for the actual material,
the balloon was a hoax,
you didn't read about
that in the press either.
We tried.
>>NOORY: And then what about
the dummies they talked about?
>>SCHMIDT: Precisely.
And that did make front
page New York Times.
>>NOORY: That's
because it was silly.
>>SCHMIDT: Because
it was, again,
part of the smokescreen, part
of what their marching orders
happened to be.
This is what you will again
disclose to the public.
Doesn't matter if
it's not the truth.
This is what we want
them to believe.
And that's the sad part.
And I think that's
where-- that's
the wonderful thing about your
work, George, and the people
that you provide a forum
for expressing themselves.
We don't get that in other
venues, other arenas.
You're one of the lone voices.
>>NOORY: We're out there
all by ourselves these days.
>>SCHMIDT: All by ourselves.
And we're as so many of the
pioneers throughout history.
We take a lot of the
slings and arrows.
But if not us, then who?
And I'm proud to at least
claim that I've taken my share.
>>NOORY: And again,
the movie "Roswell,"
which was depicted from
your book "The UFO Crash
at Roswell," there was
an interrogation scene
that I want you to
talk about in a moment.
>> They said the material
was a weather balloon.
>> Well, how in the hell
does a weather balloon affect
our national security?
Huh?
Maybe I'm too stupid
or I think I am.
I mean, I don't
get this, I mean,
unless you all are expecting
some sort of surprise balloon
attack.
Look, there's just two
possibilities here.
Either that damn thing is a
flying saucer or it ain't.
And if it is, then
I'm owed $3,000.
And if it ain't, then
it's real simple.
I ain't owed nothing.
>>NOORY: Was that Hollywood,
or did that really happen?
>>SCHMIDT: That really happened.
That was actor, singer
Dwight Yoakam who portrayed
the rancher Mac Brazel.
The weather balloon
explanation stuck.
Press accepted it and things
returned back to normal.
>>NOORY: Instantly.
>>SCHMIDT: In the meantime,
they've abducted Brazel
and they're holding him out.
>>NOORY: I love the scene
of the guy with the fedora
just kind of
looking down at him.
>>SCHMIDT: Yes.
Yes.
And we have many
descriptions of all the suits
that all of the sudden arrived
in Roswell, the spooks,
so to speak, who
were spying around.
>>NOORY: For a weather
balloon story, right?
>>SCHMIDT: For a
weather balloon story.
Secret Service agents-- we can
name the two representatives
of the president
at that time who
were overseeing the
operation with the Treasury
Department, that type of thing.
But getting back to Brazel.
The fact that
they, the military,
who has no authority over us
as civilians, would abduct him.
And in a sense, to keep him
locked up for five days,
not allow him due process
to even call his own wife,
to call his boss--
>>NOORY: Was he
charged with anything?
>>SCHMIDT: Nothing.
Well, again, the military
can't charge you with anything.
>>NOORY: They just
kidnapped him.
>>SCHMIDT: They
just kidnapped him.
And they would interrogate him.
And they would question
him night after night,
hour after hour, until
they finally broke him.
>>NOORY: Did they want
him to change his story?
>>SCHMIDT: And they got him to.
>>NOORY: They got him to.
>>SCHMIDT: They got him to.
And they took him to
the local newspaper
and into the radio
station, KGFL,
where there were all
these MPs standing
outside the door escorting him.
>>NOORY: So he
changed his story.
They basically
forced him to do it.
>>SCHMIDT: They forced him to.
>> You know, I think it's time
we set the record straight.
I reckon I knew all along that
this stuff out there weren't
from outer space.
After all them stories
come out about it--
>> Then he just out
and out recants,
says his conscience has
been bothering him a lot.
So he figured he
better tell everyone
what really went on
out there and maybe he
wouldn't feel so bad.
>> You found this a
half month earlier?
>> Yeah, thereabouts.
I mean, it just lay
out there for a while.
I didn't think nothing of it.
Then I started hearing all them
stories about flying discs.
And some neighbors stopped
by my place one afternoon.
They said something
about somebody
offering a reward, pieces
of disc or whatever.
And I figured, what the
hell, I'll give it a shot.
>> But the debris?
>> Well, yeah, I mean, that was
just tinfoil and scotch tape,
balsa wood, I guess.
I never thought it'd cause
this kind of hullabaloo.
>> Thanks, Mac.
>>NOORY: That destroyed
the entire case, didn't it?
>>SCHMIDT: But it wasn't
the end of the story.
The actor, Bob Gutin, who was
portraying the radio announcer,
was the late Frank Joyce.
And Joyce, who had
an illustrious radio
and television career
throughout New Mexico,
finally went public himself.
And he would disclose
exactly what Brazel told him
the first time when he spoke
to him when he first came in
from the sheriff's office.
And then once they went off--
>>NOORY: He saw a different
Mac Brazel, did he?
>>SCHMIDT: --microphone and
they were out in the lobby,
and Joyce noticed two MPs
standing outside the doorway--
>>NOORY: Scared him.
>>SCHMIDT: --who had
obviously escorted him
to the radio station.
And Joyce asks him, what
about the little green men.
And Brazel, before he walks
out, and looks back at Joyce
and said, but they
weren't green.
>>NOORY: Uh-huh.
It's his way of telling him--
>>SCHMIDT: His way [INAUDIBLE].
>>NOORY: It's almost like
a wink of the eye, right?
>>SCHMIDT: That we both
know what really happened.
>>NOORY: They must have
scared Brazel to death.
>>SCHMIDT: In fact, when
he returned home, again,
he talked about how it
had changed the people.
>>NOORY: Oh, my gosh.
>>SCHMIDT: Hired
hands said that where
Joyce was a man of his
word, a salt of the earth,
he became a total recluse.
If this ever came up,
he would walk away.
We would track down
and talk to people
that just ran into him at a
local pub, a local restaurant.
And the moment they
would approach him,
he'd leave a full plate
of food and walk out,
didn't want to
discuss the matter.
And it wasn't out
of embarrassment.
It's just that he
was threatened.
He was warned, don't you
ever talk about this again.
And he was a man of his word.
>>NOORY: So here we
are 70 years later.
Are we going to get
anything new out of this?
>>SCHMIDT: One of the things
we're focusing on right now,
especially with the attrition
rate of the World War II
generation, we've just
about run out of witnesses.
And even the sons and daughters
are now starting to pass away.
We've been talking about
Major Jesse Marcel.
Well, his own son,
Dr./Colonel Jesse Marcel Jr.
just passed away
a few years ago.
>>NOORY: Sure did.
>>SCHMIDT: So we're losing the--
>>NOORY: A good man too.
Doctor in Iraq.
>>SCHMIDT: Doctor.
And I refer to him as an
officer and a gentleman.
And we now have to continue our
due diligence with the history.
And one of the things we're
focusing on, for example,
is the process of
testing the wreckage.
Where would it have gone?
And we have found the
makings of some paper trail--
>>NOORY: It's got
to be somewhere.
>>SCHMIDT: --at
Battell Institute,
as we know for a fact
it can be documented,
even the press accounts.
The wreckage from Roswell
went to Wright Field,
Wright Patterson Air
Force Base, at the time
for testing and analysis.
Well, where did
it go from there?
And we're starting
to piece together
not only Battell Institute,
but Hughes Aircraft,
the Bureau of Standards, Rand
Corporation, General Electric.
And now we find out, were
discover what type of research
they were conducting at that
time and see if it links,
see if it ties in.
>>NOORY: Gosh, If we could
only find it and get it.
>>SCHMIDT: And we're planning
on another archaeological dig
for this fall.
So we continue all of our
efforts minus the witnesses.
>>NOORY: Right,
who are dying away.
>>SCHMIDT: Who are
quickly passing away.
>>NOORY: Was there a pig
rancher out there in the area?
>>SCHMIDT: Yes.
And first hand, in a
sense, he overheard.
His name was Raymond Pollard.
They had a swine--
>>NOORY: Is he dead?
>>SCHMIDT: He's still
alive, 92 years old.
>>NOORY: 92.
>>SCHMIDT: We talked
to him just last fall.
And it was his daily job, he
would drive onto the base.
He had a pass.
And they would pick up all
the refuse, all that waste,
the garbage from the mess halls.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>SCHMIDT: And he pulls up--
>>NOORY: And he feed
them to the pigs, right?
>>SCHMIDT: Feed the pigs.
So it served both
purposes very well.
And he overheard a sergeant
on the loading dock
talking about the strange
people north of town
at this crash site.
>>NOORY: Strange people,
being the occupants?
>>SCHMIDT: The occupants.
And we now question, because we
had a MP by a name of Melvin E.
Brown who was posted
behind an ambulance truck,
told to keep his eyes forward.
And the first chance he
got, he lifted up a tarp,
and there were a
couple of the bodies.
Well, he was a
member of K Squad,
which was the Kitchen Squadron.
So was that Melvin Brown?
Did he happen to
overhear Brown telling
somebody else about the strange
people at that crash site?
>>NOORY: There's just so
many conflicting stories.
But it's just amazing.
What keeps driving you, Don?
>>SCHMIDT: That there
isn't as much contradiction
as one would think,
that it's almost
as though whether
military, civilian, press,
they're all reading
from the same script.
There's the Rashomon effect.
It's based on a Japanese murder
case that became a movie.
And the whole trial is
centered on the fact
that there are three
positions on every event.
There's your opinion,
there's my opinion,
and there is what
actually happened.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>SCHMIDT: I think the
difference is as opposed
to the skeptics,
the scoffers who
say my opinion is what actually
happened, take it or leave it.
In our case, the investigation
is still ongoing.
It's still fluid.
We're still trying to determine
what actually happened.
And as a result,
we will continue
until we finally either
get full disclosure
or we're able to prove
with an actual piece
of physical evidence
what actually did happen.
>>NOORY: What a
story that would be.
>>SCHMIDT: Greatest
story of the Millennium.
>>NOORY: I think so too.
And how could one
walk away from that?
You can only remain
passionate for the possibility
that if we're wrong, it
doesn't change anything.
But if we're right,
it changes everything.
>>NOORY: Several
years ago there's
a former CIA member who died.
>>SCHMIDT: Yes.
>>NOORY: And right before
he died, he said this.
>> But my boss filled me in on
Project Blue Book and what they
had found so far as far
as graves and aliens,
and the Roswell incident.
>> How did you feel when
this first got dumped on you?
When you first
learned about this?
>> Well, I was just kind of
overwhelmed with all of this.
And I said to him,
I don't know if I'm
going to be able to be a judge
of this type of thing, what's
real and what's
not, when I don't
have much knowledge of it.
>> What did he say?
>> He said, well, we'll have to
build the information as we go.
And you'll see how this
thing is working out.
>> And then the other
thing is, of course,
you really weren't able to
tell family or close friends,
obviously.
>> No.
I couldn't tell anybody.
In fact, I had to take a vow
that I wouldn't tell anybody
a lot of it for 40 years,
and more of it for 50 years.
>>NOORY: That was a former
CIA man being interviewed
by our very own Richard Dolan--
>>SCHMIDT: Richard
Dolan, correct.
>>NOORY: --about this case.
And again, why would a guy
who is close to death lie?
>>SCHMIDT: It's reminiscent of
when we were on a CBS 48 Hours.
And it was one of the
senior newsman, Phil Jones,
who worked directly--
>>NOORY: Good newsman.
>>SCHMIDT: --under Dan Rather.
And it was the one time that
they ended the segment, Dan
Rather stating that truly
something extraordinary crashed
outside of Roswell,
New Mexico in 1947.
So what a wonderful
advocation, the fact
that here is CBS saying
something extraordinary
crashed.
But Jones, we were walking
outside the very hangar,
P3, it's called
Building 84, where
much of the wreckage
and the bodies
transited through at the
time of the incident.
>>NOORY: Originally.
>>SCHMIDT: And he
says to his boys,
is it possible that a
number of the officers
just sat down over a few
drinks back then at the PX
and they just concocted
this whole thing thinking
that at some point they
were all going to make
a lot of money off of it.
And I said, yeah, and
they all waited till they
were either dying or gone--
>>NOORY: To make that money.
>>NOORY: --before
they finally realized,
I better start today, because
I may not have tomorrow.
How silly does
that-- and he goes,
yeah, that does sound
pretty ridiculous.
>>NOORY: And there
was no money in this?
>>SCHMIDT: No.
>>NOORY: At all?
>>NOORY: Just the stories.
The military PR
guy, Walter Haut--
>>SCHMIDT: Walter Haut, yes.
>>NOORY: What did he
say later on in life?
>>SCHMIDT: Well, as we discussed
how there were little tidbits,
there were little
smatterings of the truth
that he came out
with here and there,
and then realizing
that as often as we
tried to get him to acknowledge
his full involvement.
And he was that close to
the base commander Colonel
Blanchard.
In fact, when Colonel
Blanchard, who
far from being reprimanded
over such a blunder
misidentifying a weather
balloon for a flying saucer,
he went on to become
a four star general.
And when Blanchard died at
his desk at the Pentagon--
>>NOORY: Died at his desk?
>>SCHMIDT: At his
desk at the Pentagon.
They didn't just send
a wire or a letter
informing Walter in
Roswell about his passing.
They sent a special courier.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>SCHMIDT: That's how
close they still were.
And the point was that
we just could never
accept that Walter only had
a cursory knowledge of what
transpired.
We knew we had to know as
much or more than most.
So Walter would
finally acknowledge
that he was allowed to
go out to the hangar,
he saw the remains of this ship,
he saw a number of the bodies
under a tarp on the floor.
He handled the wreckage.
He brought back from the crash
site, the impact site, some
of the remnants and was
able to display them
to his own office staff.
He was at the
staff meeting where
they contrived putting out
the original press release
and then retracting it five
hours later with the hope
that in reeling it back in,
the press and the public
would accept the
balloon explanation.
>>NOORY: And they did.
>>SCHMIDT: And they did.
So they calculated correctly,
and they were right.
>>NOORY: From the
movie "Roswell,"
which was a great depiction
of your book "UFO Crash
at Roswell," let's
take a look at how
they summarized all of this.
>> Because maybe you wouldn't
even know what was true
if you'd seen it
all for yourself.
How's that for an answer?
>> All right, then what did I
see out there in that field?
>> Oh, that?
Why, that was a weather balloon.
>> No, it wasn't.
I know what I saw, and it
was not from this world.
>> Don't you understand, Jesse?
You have nothing.
Just a lot of old memories
and secondhand recollections.
Nobody is going to take you
seriously, not without proof,
not without hard evidence.
>>NOORY: Where is that
hard evidence, Don?
>>SCHMIDT: Wonderful scene
with actor Martin Sheen.
>>NOORY: Oh, he's a great actor.
>>SCHMIDT: He's kind of
playing a deep throat.
So a bit of a composite
and everything.
And the point, and it's the
same frustration that not only
that we continue to possess,
but all the witnesses.
No matter what you
experience, you have no proof.
You have no evidence.
And what's wonderful
about Roswell.
Like all other UFO
incidents, which
are just fleeting,
just something that
just quickly transpires
and there's nothing
that you can hold onto, that
you can take into a lab,
Roswell was the
recovery of something.
And from all accounts,
something extraordinary.
We don't need to point
our finger skyward.
We can point our
fingers to Washington.
We can point our fingers
to specific facilities
where we still suspect may
be conducting such research.
Or as Steven Spielberg
has demonstrated,
when you can't figure something
out, like in his movies
"Raiders of the Lost Ark,"
Indiana Jones, if you can't
find the On button,
all you can do
is crate it up and hide
it, never to be seen again.
I remain very skeptical
that after all these years
it's still a cover-up
of ignorance,
that it's such a quantum leap
between the technologies,
we can't bridge that as of yet.
And all we can do is go
back to it every so often
and resume some of the testing.
So I personally am very
skeptical about disclosure.
>>NOORY: Oh, I do too.
I tell Steve Bassett that--
>>SCHMIDT: They have
nothing to disclose.
>>NOORY: They're not
going to tell us.
>>SCHMIDT: They have,
I think, Tracy Torm,
the Peabody Award
winning screenwriter,
uses the best analogy.
You could take something
as simple as a toaster
and teleport it back in time--
>>NOORY: People wouldn't
know what it was.
>>SCHMIDT: But they may
be able to take it apart,
put it back together again.
But if they can't plug it in,
they can never get it to work.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>SCHMIDT: Well, we
still can't plug this in.
So what do they disclose?
So all we can do
is continue to try
to put together the puzzle,
whatever information we have.
And we have to at
least acknowledge
that we have forced the hand
of the government in the sense
that we are now up to four
official explanations.
I always joke about a husband
trying that with his wife
some night if he
come home too late.
You know, try this story, honey.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
They won't work.
>>SCHMIDT: But so
far, it's what we're
dealing with with Roswell,
four explanations.
>>NOORY: What has
always baffled me,
Don, is the technology that
would cause the craft to crash.
>>SCHMIDT: Yes.
>>NOORY: They got
here from God knows
where, how many millions
of light years away
through incredible technology
of bending space and time,
I'm sure.
But why would it crash?
>>SCHMIDT: Well, as
I described early on,
there was a tremendous
lightning storm.
The original conclusion is that
we were already dealing with
an electromagnetic
propulsion, anti-gravity,
something that essentially
worked off as far as--
>>NOORY: So that threw it
off kilter or something.
>>SCHMIDT: And just
imagine the combination
of that and lightning.
And if we were dealing
with somewhat of a scout
craft launched from a
mother ship or something--
I don't mean to speculate.
I don't like speculation.
But if we were dealing more
with an atmospheric craft,
as opposed to an
actual spacecraft--
>>NOORY: Right.
It came aboard something.
>>SCHMIDT: One of
the flight engineers,
he was a flight mechanic
who worked with the 393rd,
his name was Sergeant
William Ennis.
So they worked on the
Silverplates, the B-29 bombers.
They could take them down, a
part down to the last rivet,
put them back together again.
And before he died he said
to me, Don, before I go,
you have to find out
how that thing flew.
It didn't have a
moving part on it.
So again, what do you replicate?
>>NOORY: If you had
a chance to talk
to those secret
keepers of information,
what would you ask
them to reveal?
>>SCHMIDT: Well, two things.
I'd ask them, what would have
possessed them to essentially
apply such fear and intimidation
to civilians where they have
no authority, when they knew
that the balloon was going
to be accepted, that
things were going
to return to normal post-haste.
And after all these years, why
is such fear and intimidation
still being orchestrated?
We still have witnesses
that get phone calls.
Walter Haut, his late
wife would tell us
for 30 years they were
getting late night phone
calls still threatening them,
still warning them about this.
So what's going on here?
Is it something that is
even out of your control,
beyond your technology?
And that in itself would be
just a tremendous revelation.
And then secondly, if we are
dealing with an intelligence
off the planet, has
there been any contact?
Are you in some way
cooperating with them?
And if that's the case, are we
dealing with either something
benevolent, or are we
dealing with something
that the great
secret in all this
is that we're dealing
with something
that is still rather suspect?
>>NOORY: And they can't stop it.
>>SCHMIDT: And
they can't stop it.
>>NOORY: If you could
get one question answered
about Roswell, what
would that question be?
>>SCHMIDT: Well, of course,
was it from off the planet.
I think that's still the biggest
mystery, the biggest obstacle.
Are we dealing with
something so advanced
that it still was of an earthly
origin, which I don't believe.
I just can't see
now after 70 years
that it hasn't been released,
that it hasn't been disclosed.
I mean, all other
such technology
that has been
advanced since then,
I would like to believe we've
seen for better or worse.
And what was so important?
What's the deep, dark
secret about Roswell?
It's something more sinister
that forced them to--
>>NOORY: Not disclose.
>>SCHMIDT: --apply such
suppression not only
the witnesses, but
also their families.
What were they so
afraid of back then?
And what are they
still so afraid of?
Is there something beyond
even that realization
that we're not alone?
To me, there's still
something else.
And that may be the most
disconcerting aspect
of all this, that
there is something much
more Machiavellian in nature.
>>NOORY: Don, thanks for
being on Beyond Belief.
>>SCHMIDT: George,
always a pleasure.
Good luck with the
show, as always.
>>NOORY: Probably one of the
most incredible stories ever,
the crash at Roswell.
But with investigators like
Don Schmidt, maybe one day
we will really get that answer.
I'm George Noory, and thank
you for watching Beyond Belief.
[THEME MUSIC]